As I write this edition in 2009, Python comes in two flavors—version 3.0 is an emerging
and incompatible mutation of the language, and 2.6 retains backward compatibility
with the vast body of existing Python code. Although Python 3 is viewed as the future
of Python, Python 2 is still widely used and will be supported in parallel with Python
3 for years to come. While 3.0 is largely the same language, it runs almost no code
written for prior releases (the mutation of print from statement to function alone,
aesthetically sound as it may be, breaks nearly every Python program ever written).
This split presents a bit of a dilemma for both programmers and book authors. While
it would be easier for a book to pretend that Python 2 never existed and cover 3 only,
this would not address the needs of the large Python user base that exists today. A vast
amount of existing code was written for Python 2, and it won’t be going away any time
soon. And while newcomers to the language can focus on Python 3, anyone who must
use code written in the past needs to keep one foot in the Python 2 world today. Since
it may be years before all third-party libraries and extensions are ported to Python 3,
this fork might not be entirely temporary.To address this dichotomy and to meet the needs of all potential readers, this edition
of this book has been updated to cover both Python 3.0 and Python 2.6 (and later
releases in the 3.X and 2.X lines). It’s intended for programmers using Python 2, programmers using Python 3, and programmers stuck somewhere between the two.
That is, you can use this book to learn either Python line. Although the focus here is
on 3.0 primarily, 2.6 differences and tools are also noted along the way for programmers
using older code. While the two versions are largely the same, they diverge in some
important ways, and I’ll point these out along the way.
For instance, I’ll use 3.0 print calls in most examples, but will describe the 2.6 print
statement, too, so you can make sense of earlier code. I’ll also freely introduce new
features, such as the nonlocal statement in 3.0 and the string format method in 2.6 and
3.0, and will point out when such extensions are not present in older Pythons.
If you are learning Python for the first time and don’t need to use any legacy code, I
encourage you to begin with Python 3.0; it cleans up some longstanding warts in the
language, while retaining all the original core ideas and adding some nice new tools.Many popular Python libraries and tools will likely be available for Python 3.0 by the
time you read these words, especially given the file I/O performance improvements
expected in the upcoming 3.1 release. If you are using a system based on Python 2.X,
however, you’ll find that this book addresses your concerns, too, and will help you
migrate to 3.0 in the future.
By proxy, this edition addresses other Python version 2 and 3 releases as well, though
some older version 2.X code may not be able to run all the examples here. Although
class decorators are available in both Python 2.6 and 3.0, for example, you cannot use
them in an older Python 2.X that did not yet have this feature. See Tables P-1 and P-2
later in this Preface for summaries of 2.6 and 3.0 changes